Verbs are the single most important type of word in Dakota, and consequently also the most complex.  Like in English, Dakota verbs express actions, but unlike English verbs, they are much more than a simple component of a sentence.  In Dakota, each (fully-inflected) verb constitutes an entire sentence all on its own.  Verbs express not only what action is occuring in a sentence, but also who is performing that action, and to what or for whom that action is being performed.  

Because verbs in Dakota are a different beast than in English; being full sentences rather than mere descriptions of an action, they behave very differently. The first fundamental difference is Dakota verbs lack what linguists call an "infinitive form," which in English is often thought of as the base form of the verb.  For instance, the infinitive of the english verb describing running is "to run".  This form is usually thought of as the most abstract form of the verb; it describes the action itself without any reference to context, and certainly doesn't constitute a sentence on its own (imagine the confusion that would result if someone walked up to you and uttered simply "to run," with no context).  To make a valid English sentence, verbs need to be used together with other words describing who or what is doing the action.  For example, "He runs," or "I am running" are complete sentences in English as we now know both the action that is taking place, and who is doing it.  The infinitive verb "to run" has to change form to fit in these sentences, and this change from an infinitive form to a form used in a sentence is called conjugation.

In Dakota on the other hand, verbs take the role of simple English sentences, and express both the action and whose doing it in a single word.  The two are inseperable in Dakota, and so there is no "abstract" version of a verb expressing just the action which is waiting to be conjugated and used in a sentence; instead each verb has a form to express the action/actor combination. Various forms of the verb expressing "running" in Dakota are \emph{iyanke}, he runs, \emph{waimnanke}, I run, \emph{yainanke}, you run, and \emph{unkiyankapi}, we run.  The simplest Dakota sentences express and action being done by a 3rd person subject (either a he, she, or an it), and this is the "basic" form of Dakota verbs, from which the other conjugations are formed.  However its imporant to remember that this basic form is not like the English infinitive form, it is always a full sentence in its own right.
